
-------- Forwarding messages -------- From: "Analytical Chemistry"
<onbehalfof@manuscriptcentral.com> Date: 2023-03-31 23:57:13 To:
luwang0520@163.com Subject: Revision Requested for Manuscript ID ac-2023-01072t
31-Mar-2023

Journal:  Analytical Chemistry Manuscript ID: ac-2023-01072t Title: "MCnebula:
Critical chemical classes to classify and boost identification by visualization
for untargeted LC-MS/MS data analysis" Author(s): Huang, Lichuang; Shan,
Qiyuan; Lyu, Qiang; Zhang, Shuosheng; Wang, Lu; Cao, Gang

Dear Dr. Wang:

Thank you for submitting your manuscript for publication in Analytical
Chemistry.  It has been examined by expert reviewers who have concluded that
the work is of potential interest to the readership of Analytical Chemistry.
There are some concerns by both reviewers that need to be fully addressed
before further consideration for publication in AC.

However, based on the comments received, it is clear that major revision of
this manuscript will be required before a decision can be made on its
publication.  I will be pleased to consider a revised manuscript that addresses
the reviewers' concerns.  Your revised manuscript may be returned to one or
more of the original reviewers, along with your itemized response to the
reviewers’ comments.

Please submit your revision on your ACS Paragon Plus homepage, along with a
cover letter containing your point-by-point response to the reviewers'
comments, by 15-May-2023.  A revision received after this period will be
considered a new submission and will be subject to a complete review process.
Even in this case, a detailed response to the previous review and description
of the revisions made are still required.

The following list should be reviewed carefully for important manuscript
submission requirements.  Missing items or incorrect format may delay the
acceptance of your manuscript.  For more details, please refer to the author
guidelines at: http://pubs.acs.org/page/ancham/submission/index.html.

Please note that you may receive a follow-up message within 24 hours describing
the non-scientific changes you must also make to your manuscript before you
submit the revision.

Please provide the following required files:

•	A clean .doc/.docx file designated as the “Manuscript File”.  •	A
highlighted/tracked changes version of the manuscript showing the changes made,
uploaded separately and designated as "Supporting Information for Review Only".
•	Supporting Information (SI) for Publication (if applicable).  I do not
require a highlighted version of the SI; this must be uploaded as a clean copy.
SI may not be included in the Manuscript File.

Other Information:

•	When revising the manuscript in order to address the reviewers' comments,
please keep in mind the overall length requirements for your manuscript type.
Graphics should be sized at the final production size.  Single-column graphics
are preferred and can be sized up to 240 points wide (3.33 in).  Double-column
graphics must be sized between 300 and 504 points (4.167 in and 7 in).
Graphics have a maximum height of 660 points (9.167 in) including the caption
(please allow 12 pts for each line of caption text).  •	Time limit for revision
is 60 days; a request to extend the deadline requires Editor’s approval.
Special circumstances will be considered.

Funding Sources: Authors are required to report ALL funding sources and
grant/award numbers relevant to this manuscript. Enter all sources of funding
for ALL authors relevant to this manuscript in BOTH the Open Funder Registry
tool in ACS Paragon Plus and in the manuscript to meet this requirement. See
http://pubs.acs.org/page/4authors/funder_options.html for complete
instructions.

ORCID: Authors submitting manuscript revisions are required to provide their
own validated ORCID iDs before completing the submission, if an ORCID iD is not
already associated with their ACS Paragon Plus user profiles. This iD may be
provided during original manuscript submission or when submitting the
manuscript revision. You can provide only your own ORCID iD, a unique
researcher identifier. If your ORCID iD is not already validated and associated
with your ACS Paragon Plus user profile, you may do so by following the
ORCID-related links in the Email/Name section of your ACS Paragon Plus account.
All authors are encouraged to register for and associate their own ORCID iDs
with their ACS Paragon Plus profiles. The ORCID iD will be displayed in the
published article for any author on a manuscript who has a validated ORCID iD
associated with ACS Paragon Plus when the manuscript is accepted. Learn more at
http://www.orcid.org.

ACS Publications uses Crossref Similarity Check Powered by iThenticate to
detect instances of similarity in submitted manuscripts.  In publishing only
original research, ACS is committed to deterring plagiarism, including
self-plagiarism.  Your manuscript may be screened for similarity to published
material.

Thank you for considering Analytical Chemistry as a forum for the publication
of your work.

With sincere regards,

Prof. Benjamin Garcia Analytical Chemistry Associate Editor Email:
garcia-office@anchem.acs.org
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Reviewer(s)' Comments to Author: Reviewer: 1

Recommendation: Publish either as is or subject to minor revisions as
indicated.

Comments: In this study, a framework called MCnebula was established to
facilitate mass spectrometry data analysis process by focusing on critical
chemical classes and visualization. MCnebula can be applied to explore
classification and structural characteristic of unknown compounds that beyond
the limit of spectral library, which was very interesting. The concept of
MCnebula was similar with molecular network in some degree since its function
of visualization. The research design was appropriated, and the methods were
adequately described. In my view, I recommend publication in Analytical
Chemistry, but there are two main concerns regarding the manuscript.

1.	The first one is related to the dependence on the MCnebula tool. I think
    that this complex workflow will reduce the number of potential users. It’s
    better to simplify the workflow and include the analysis platform in R
    package. The workflow of MCnebula only included 'Feature detection', but
    the R package didn’t include it. There are many good processing tools in R
    such as XCMS.

    2.	The second main concern is related to the usage guidelines. Although
    reference documentation for the R package was available, there was lack of
    more detailed examples and instructions on how to use the workflow as a
    whole, including installation for MAC and Windows, specific methods for
    bridging the various modules of the workflow etc.

    Other comments :

    1. I agree with the authors that in recent years there have been huge
   developments in the field of in silico fragmentation. However, these in
   silico predictions have been seriously flawed in the past, for example, in
   the lipids field. Please, discuss.

   2. In the section of introduction, some misuse of tense should be corrected.
   For example, in the line 34, “…several strategies have been developed…”

   3.	Some sentences could be more precise and concise. For example, in the
    Line 48 Page 2, suggestion: ” Currently, the cutting-edge technology,
    called SIRIUS 4, integrates many advanced artificial intelligence
    algorithms and has achieved an accuracy rate of 70% when retrieving
    structures from libraries.”

    4.	In Page 13, Line 25, the stability comparison between MCnebula and GNPS
    were 10.5%, 19.8% and 41.7%, 50.1%, respectively (Fig. 2a). Please confirm
    if the figure citation here is right.

    5.	In the section of discussion (Page 23 Line15), please explain in detail
    what could the Compound 1642 turn into? What kind of factor could be
    responsible for the chemical transformation?


Additional Questions: Significance: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

Originality: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

Broad Interest: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

Technical Quality: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

Are the conclusions adequately supported by the data?: Yes

Are the references appropriate and correct?: Yes

Is the English adequate?: Yes

Is the quality of the figures sufficient?: Yes

Are the data statistically significant with appropriate controls included?: Yes


Reviewer: 2

Recommendation: May eventually be publishable, but requires major revisions as
indicated.

Comments: In this manuscript, the authors presented a computer tool (also
called MCnebula) for analyzing and visualizing untargeted LC-MS data. This tool
allowed the characterization of sample unknown compounds by using their
fragmentation properties to determine their classes, structures, and
substructures. The performance of the MCnebula tool was demonstrated using two
examples: a human serum metabolomic analysis and a herbal analysis.

In my opinion, the MCnebula tool presented in this manuscript could be useful,
particularly for metabolic pathway analysis by visualization. The manuscript
described its operation and performance appropriately. The authors integrated a
new abundance- based classes (ABC) selection algorithm with the MCnebula tool
for chemical class selection, which was available for selecting representative
classes to achieve the subsequent analysis. The manuscript contains many good
ideas and has some novel developments in algorithms. Therefore, I recommend its
publication in Analytical Chemistry.  Here are a few general comments regarding
the manuscript:

(1) For this work to be published, I think the tutorial
associated with MCnebula has to work properly. I was able to download and
install MCnebula, along with the associated Sirius4 dependency. Unfortunately,
the tutorial did 't work for me. I tried to follow the instructions provided at
https://github.com/Cao-lab-zcmu/MCnebula2.

(2) Fig.3 showed the comparison
between the two methods but I am not sure if “classified numbers” could
represent the accuracy of chemical classes. Do higher values mean higher
accuracy? I recommended general terms like precision and recall instead of
classified numbers. 

(3) Please explain the function of Parent-nebula since I
didn’t get it from the manuscript.

(4) In visualization, many tools or
websites (GNPS and MetaboAnalyst) contain the function of network and
clustering analysis for the LC-MS dataset. The characteristics and advantages
of MCnebula should be added in the manuscript compared with other tools.

(5) In fig.6, how to get heatmaps from the diagram of child-nebula? I didn’t get it
well from the section of Method.

(6) In the section of method, how to draw
nebula diagrams, select the child-nebula from parent-nebula and match features
ID with nebula-index? These questions still do not make sense to me even after
reading method. Please explain them in details. 

(7) Page 21, line 31-32, I
didn’t find the features of ID 1642, 1785 and 2321 in the supplementary tables.

(8) All codes used in the manuscript should be provided. Also, check the links
for the MASSIVE dataset. Both links are not pointing to the correct dataset.

(9) Some concepts should be explained well when are mentioned in the manuscript
for the first time, such as “feature level” , “chemical classified level” and
“Regex match” etc.

(10) The manuscript would benefit greatly by a thorough
revision specifically focused on the English language. At times, the high
amount of English-associated errors makes it difficult to interpret the message
of the paper.

A few general English notes:

1. Check the repetition of punctuations and words.  Page 3, line 19, there were
   two “.” in one sentence.  Page 6, line 30, the word “without” was
   duplicated.

   2. Check both the phrase and the verb tenses.  Page 8, line 30, “allows the
   analysis process…” should be replaced by “allowed the analysis process…”
   Page 8, line 39, “In order that…”should be replaced by “In case that…”

   3. Check several typos in the manuscript.

   Additional Questions: Significance: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

   Originality: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

   Broad Interest: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

   Technical Quality: High (suitable for Analytical Chemistry)

   Are the conclusions adequately supported by the data?: Yes

   Are the references appropriate and correct?: Yes

   Is the English adequate?: Yes

   Is the quality of the figures sufficient?: Yes

   Are the data statistically significant with appropriate controls included?:
   Yes

   -----------------------------------------------------------------------

   To Revise Your Manuscript on the Web:

   To revise your manuscript, log in to ACS Paragon Plus with your ACS ID at
   http://acsparagonplus.acs.org/ and select "My Authoring Activity".  There
   you will find your manuscript title listed under "Revisions Requested by
   Editorial Office."  Your original files are available to you when you upload
   your revised manuscript.  If you are replacing files, please remove the old
   version of the file from the manuscript before uploading the new file.

   When submitting your revised manuscript through ACS Paragon Plus, you will
   be able to respond to the comments made by the reviewer(s) in the text box
   provided or by attaching a file containing your response letter.

   ----------------------------------------------------------------------- FOR
   ASSISTANCE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT SUBMISSION PLEASE CONTACT: ACS Publications
   Customer Services & Information (CSI) Email: support@services.acs.org Phone:
   202-872-4357 Toll Free Phone: 800-227-9919 (USA/Canada only)
    
 
 ------------ PLEASE NOTE: This email message, including any attachments,
 contains confidential information related to peer review and is intended
 solely for the personal use of the recipient(s) named above. No part of this
 communication or any related attachments may be shared with or disclosed to
 any third party or organization without the explicit prior written consent of
 the journal Editor and ACS. If the reader of this message is not the intended
 recipient or is not responsible for delivering it to the intended recipient,
 you have received this communication in error. Please notify the sender
 immediately by e-mail, and delete the original message.
 
 As an author or reviewer for ACS Publications, we may send you communications
 about related journals, topics or products and services from the American
 Chemical Society. Please email us at pubs-comms-unsub@acs.org if you do not
 want to receive these. Note, you will still receive updates about your
 manuscripts, reviews, or future invitations to review.   

 Thank you.
