**Materials and methods**

**MCnebula algorithm**

**Overview**. The analysis of untargeted LC-MS/MS datasets typically
starts with feature detection. Annotating these features is
time-consuming and extracting useful information for further biological
research can also be challenging. To address these issues, we present
MCnebula, with an abundance-based classes (ABC) selection algorithm, to
boost mass spectrometry data analysis by focusing on critical chemical
classes and visualization in multiple dimensions.

**Molecular formula and chemical structure prediction**. The analysis of
MS/MS spectra involve a process of inference and prediction. We deduce
the molecular formula based on the molecular weight of elements
composition and possible fragmentation pattern of the MS/MS spectrum by
SIRIUS; We then search for the exact chemical structure from compound
structure databases. However, this process is often uncertain as several
factors can affect the reliability of MS/MS data and the correctness of
inference. SIRIUS generates a list of candidates for the potential
molecular formula, chemical structure, and chemical classification
behind each MS/MS spectral feature. In such cases, MCnebula extract
these candidates and determine the unique molecular formula and chemical
structure for each MS/MS spectrum based on the highest score of
prediction.

**Top candidate selection by multiple score systems**. After the process
of compound prediction, we get candidates for molecular formula,
structure, and chemical classes. Some candidates are correct while
others are not. While the correct predictions for molecular formula and
chemical structure are unique, the chemical classification may have
multiple correct predictions belonging to different classes. The scoring
method depends on personalized research purpose. We use scores based on
various criteria such as isotopes, mass error, structural similarity,
and chemical classes to rank and filter the candidates. With numerous
score systems available, we filter out low-scoring candidates and focus
on those with higher scores, which are more likely to be the correct
compound. However, in most cases, the top candidates from the three
scoring systems are not always consistent. So, we choose a 'specific
candidate' as a reference in the user-selected scoring system and
retrieve its chemical information from the other systems for data
integration. We obtain unique molecular formulas and chemical structure
for the reference by scoring and ranking, but for chemical classes, more
work is needed.

**Chemical classification**. Compounds with MS/MS spectrum can be
classified based on their overall structure and local structure, which
we refer to as the dominant structure and substructure, respectively.
Therefore, in the chemical classification system, we can classify
compounds not only based on their dominant structure, but also based on
their substructure. When the dominant structure is unavailable, or the
MS/MS spectral fragment is insufficient, we classify the compounds using
substructure information to gain knowledge of the compound.

**ABC selection**. The ABC selection algorithm evaluates all features
collectively in an untargeted LC-MS/MS dataset, by examining the number
and abundance of features for each chemical classification at different
levels with both substructure and dominant structure. Based on this
analysis, representative classes are selected for subsequent analysis
(as shown in Figure 6).

-   Create Stardust Classes (Inner filter). By using the posterior
    probability of classification prediction (PPCP) data for each
    feature, simple threshold or absolute conditions are set to filter
    the chemical classes, and refer to as 'inner' filtering.

-   Cross filter Stardust Classes. This involves combining the data of
    the chemical classes and their classified features (i.e.Â Stardust
    Classes data), grouping them based on the chemical classes, and then
    performing statistics on the features within each group. Statistics
    may also be performed on these data in conjunction with features
    annotation data, or to compare groups with each other. This method
    involves crossover of attributes for filtering, hence it is referred
    to as 'cross' filtering. (See details in the next subsection about
    Cross filter Stardust Classes.)

The resulting dataset is called Nebula-Index, which records multiple
chemical classes and their associated features. Each chemical class is
considered as a 'Nebula' and its classified 'features' are the
components of the 'Nebula'. These Nebulae are visualized as networks,
with Parent-Nebula representing all features combined and Child-Nebulae
representing individual classes.

**Details of Cross filter Stardust Classes.** This method involves
integrating three modules, as shown in Figure 6:

*Cross-filtering by 'quantity'* (abundance selection): The 'features'
quantity limitation is set for each group (a chemical class with its
classified 'features'). The minimum quantity of 'features' within the
group and the maximum proportion of 'features' quantity within the group
versus all 'features' (unique) quantity of all groups are used as
thresholds. Chemical classes with too many or too few 'features' are
filtered out.

*Cross-filtering by 'score'* (Goodness assessment): This step associates
the Stardust Classes data with 'features' annotation data. For each
group, the Goodness assessment is performed for each target attribute
(continuous attribute, generally a scoring attribute of compound
identification, such as 'Tanimoto similarity'). If the group satisfies
all the expected Goodness, the chemical class is retained. The Goodness
($G$) is calculated as follows: $G = n/N$, where $n$ is the quantity of
'features' of which the target attributes satisfy the cut-off, and $N$
is the quantity of all 'features'.

The assessment of Goodness is related to the parameters of 'tolerance'
and 'cutoff': the expected Goodness value of 'tolerance' and the actual
Goodness, which is related to the parameter 'cutoff'.

Goodness assessment can be given to multiple target attributes. Note
that the chemical class is retained only if it passes the Goodness
assessment of all target attributes. The main purpose of this step is to
filter out chemical classes with too many 'features' of low structural
identification.

*Cross-filtering by 'identical'* (identicality assessment): This step
involves a similarity assessment of chemical classes. A hierarchical
range is set for chemical classification, and groups within this range
are compared for similarity. If the classified 'features' of two groups
are almost identical to each other, the chemical class represented by
one of the groups is excluded. The degree of identicality between two
groups (A and B) is assessed, as well as the value of the parameter
'identical_factor' ($i$) :

$x$: ratio of the classified 'features' of A belonging to B

$y$: ratio of the classified 'features' of B belonging to A

$i$: value of parameter 'identical_factor'

If $x > i$ and $y > i$, the two groups are considered identical, and the
group with fewer 'features' is discarded. The purpose of this step is to
filter out classes that may incorporate each other and are similar in
scope. The *in silico* prediction approach may not be able to
distinguish which class the potential compound belongs to from the
LC-MS/MS spectra.

**Network graph presentation**. The features and their annotations are
integrated as Nebulae based on the Nebula-Index. These Nebulae are
represented as network-type graph data. The feature annotation data
includes top candidates for chemical formula and structure. The MS/MS
spectral similarity of the features is calculated and used to generate
the edge data for the network graph.

**Visualization system**. MCnebula integrates various R packages to
format data, including the 'ggplot2' package. To make visualization
easier for users, we developed the 'ggset' data class, which stores
pre-defined ggplot2 plotting functions and parameters for visualizing
Nebulae. Users can customize the visualization according to their
specific needs or the requirements of the publisher.

**Statistical analysis**. MCnebula integrates the functions of the
'limma' package for differential expression analysis of RNA-sequence and
microarray data\[40\], and package them for differential analysis of
metabolomics data. The gene expression matrix and feature quantification
matrix of LC-MS are similar, both have phenotypic variables (sample
information) and dependent variables (gene expression or feature
quantification values). Our method is only appropriate for experimental
designs in which explanatory variables are factorial variables and the
design matrix is without an intercept \[41\].

**Data structure**. MCnebula was primarily developed using the R S4
system of object-oriented programming. All data including 'features'
annotation data and visualization data is stored in a single object
(class 'mcnebula'), which simplifies the application, makes data
management and analysis easier to perform and repeat.

**Reporting system**. MCnebula includes a reporting system that enables
the analysis process to be output as a PDF document or in other formats.
The reporting system is based on the 'report' data class, which stores
each step of the analysis as a section and can be easily modified
according to the user's requirements. Furthermore, the 'rmarkdown' R
package \[43\] is incorporated in the reporting system to generate
reports.

**Code Compatibility**. MCnebula performs downstream analysis by
extracting data from the pre-computed SIRIUS project, which is the
primary data source for MCnebula 2. The SIRIUS software is continually
updated and enhanced. From SIRIUS version 4 to version 5
(https://github.com/boecker-lab/sirius), the data structure and
attribute names in the project directory have been modified. To ensure
that MCnebula is not affected by version problems, we have designed its
application programming interface (API) for various SIRIUS versions.

**MCnebula evaluation**

**Spectra dataset for evaluation**. To evaluate the performance of
MCnebula, the spectra from the GNPS MS/MS library was used
(http://prime.psc.riken.jp/compms/msdial/main.html#MSP). To prevent
overfitting during library match evaluation, 'noise' was added to the
MS/MS spectra\[44\]. Two models of noise were simulated: medium noise
and high noise. The simulation involved a global mass shift, individual
mass deviations, intensity variations, and additional 'noise peaks.'
Isotope patterns were also simulated using the 'get.isotopes.pattern'
function within the 'rcdk' R package\[45\]. The mass and abundance of
isotopes were considered for the adduct type to increase or decrease
exact mass. The 'isotope peaks' were merged into the MS1 list of
compounds, and all spectra collections were formatted into mgf or csv
file for the continuing MCnebula and benchmark analysis.

**Evaluation method.** MCnebula and benchmark workflow was conducted for
all the three simulated datasets. SIRIUS 4 command-line interface (CLI)
(version 4.9.12) was applied for computation, and filtered out MS/MS
spectra with empty fragmentation peaks. In total 7524 out of 8782
compounds were left for evaluation. ClassyFire was used to assess the
classification accuracy\[24\]. After *in-silico* annotation, we obtained
structure annotation, International Chemical Identifier Key (InChIKey),
and other metadata of these compounds. Considering that ClassyFire only
supports chemical identities those structures have been classified in
its server previously, we used the first hash block of InChIKeys
(InChIKey planar, which represents the molecular skeleton) to query the
PubChem application programming interface (API)
(https://pubchemdocs.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pug-rest) \[46\]. This provided us
with all the possible InChIKeys of isomerism (stereo, isotopic
substitution) \[47\]. Classification of small molecules depends on their
molecular skeleton, so chemical identities that share the same InChIKey
planar are identical in classification. The InChIKey list was imported
into ClassyFire to obtain chemical classification. In our R script, once
any InChIKey of isomerism matched the classified data in the database,
we turned off the acquisition status for this molecular skeleton. In the
end, we collated, integrated, and assigned all these chemical
annotations as standard reference.

Due to differences in algorithms and classified results, we evaluated
the MCnebula and benchmark methods separately. Since sub-structural
classification was not available for the benchmark method, we excluded
these classes during the evaluation analysis. Nevertheless, some
compounds within the remaining classes may still be categorized as
sub-structural. We assigned three levels for evaluation: 'True,'
'Latent,' and 'False.' 'True' indicated that the classified classes were
consistent with those of ClassyFire. 'Latent' indicated that the
classified classes were not consistent with ClassyFire, but their parent
classes at the 'class' level were consistent. 'False' indicated that the
classified classes were completely inconsistent with ClassyFire.

To evaluate the identification of classes or structures, we merged the
results with a standard reference by InChIKey planar. For the evaluation
of chemical structure identification, we considered a structure as
'true' if it matched the chemical structure identified by InChIKey
planar. However, this evaluation neglected stereochemistry due to the
limit of LC-MS/MS detection.

**Serum dataset**

We re-analyzed 245 LC-MS/MS runs from MASSIVE (id no. MSV000083593)
(blanks, controls, and samples) \[42\]. MZmine2 (version 2.53) was
applied for feature detection \[\]. MS/MS spectra were exported in mgf
format for SIRIUS 4 (version 4.9.12) computation\[22\], and merged
across samples into one fragmentation list with a 30% peak count
threshold filtering. The feature detection workflow was based on FBMN
preprocessing and SIRIUS computational prerequisites. ZODIAC \[39\],
CSI:fingerID \[20\], CANOPUS \[34\] were involved in SIRIUS.
Specifically, we customized SIRIUS to detect the Iodine element while
predicting the formula. We used MCnebula for subsequent data analysis
and exported them as reports (see the section on Data and code
availability).

Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) metabolic pathway
enrichment analysis was conducted with the identified InChIKey planar
structures to search for compounds in the metabolic pathway. To account
for the possibility of identified structural deviations due to
stereoisomerism, we used the InChIKey planar to obtain all possible
InChIKeys and PubChem CID via PubChem API. Pubchem CID was converted to
KEGG ID by the R package MetaboAnalystR. KEGG enrichment with the
'pagerank' algorithm was performed via the R package FELLA. We
integrated these methods into functions within MCnebula workflow, which
are freely available as the 'exMCnebula2' package.

**Herb dataset**

**Materials and processing.** The dried bark of E. ulmoides was obtained
from the ZheJiang ZuoLi Chinese Medical Pieces LTD. Two types of
preparations, Raw-Eucommia and Pro-Eucommia, were made as follows: (1)
Raw-Eucommia: The shreds or blocks of E. ulmoides dried bark were taken,
powdered, and passed through 80-mesh sieves for further processing. (2)
Pro-Eucommia: The shreds or blocks of E. ulmoides dried bark were fried
with saline water (using an amount of salt equal to 2% of the weight of
E. ulmoides, with 10 times the volume of water to dissolve), and
smothered in airtight conditions for 30 minutes. Then, the barks were
dried in an oven at 60 Â°C, followed by baking at 140 Â°C for 60 minutes.
Finally, the baked barks were powdered and passed through 80-mesh sieves
for further processing.

**Sample preparation.** Weighing 2 g of Raw-Eucommia powder and
Pro-Eucommia powder, adding 50 ml of methanol/water (1:1, v/v), and
subjecting it to ultrasonication (20 kHz for 40 min). The mixture was
then filtered to separate the filtrate and residue. The residue was
further extracted with 50 ml of methanol/water (1:1, v/v) under
ultrasonication (40 kHz, 250 W for 20 min) and filtered again. The
filtrate of the two extracts was combined and the solvent was
evaporated. Methanol/water (1:1, v/v) was added to redissolve the
extract and the volume was adjusted to 5 ml. Finally, the supernatant
was obtained by centrifugation (12,000 r.p.m. for 10 min) for subsequent
LC-MS analysis.

**LC-MS experiments**. LC-MS analysis was performed using a Dionex
Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with a high-resolution
Fourier-transform mass spectrometer. The mobile phase consisted of
solvent A (formic acid/water) and solvent B (formic acid/acetonitrile).
The Waters Acquity HSS T3 column was used for separation. The gradient
profile for separation was as follows: 0-2 min, 2% - 5% B; 2-10 min,
5%-15%, B; 10-15 min, 15%-25% B; 15-18 min, 25%-50% B; 18-23 min,
50-100% of solvent B at 23 min. The flow rate was 0.3 mL/min and the
column temperature was set at 40Â°C. Mass spectrometric analysis was
performed using an Orbitrap Elite instrument equipped with an ESI source
that operated in the negative ionization mode. The survey scans were
conducted in the Orbitrap mass analyzer operating at a 120,000 resolving
power. A mass range of 100-1500 m/z and a normalized collision energy of
30 eV were used for survey scans. The analysis method was set to analyze
the top 10 most intense ions from the survey scan, and a dynamic
exclusion was enabled for 15 s.

**MCnebula Workflow**. MZmine2 is a software for mass spectrometry data
processing and was used in this study for feature detection in the
E.ulmoides dataset. The resulting features were then processed using the
SIRIUS software. The subsequent analysis of the E.ulmoides dataset was
similar to the analysis of the serum metabolic dataset and a report was
generated for this analysis. The details of the analysis, as well as the
code and data, are available in the Data and Code Availability section
of the study.

**Data processing**

ââ Raw data (.raw) were converted into mzML format in centroid mode via
MSConvert in ProteoWizard\[[5](file:///C:\l)\]. The .mzML files were
processed with MZmine2 (v.2.53) and followed by SIRIUS 4 in Pop!-OS
(Ubuntu) 22.04 LTS 64-bits workstation (Intel Core i9-10900X, 3.70GHz
$\times$ 20, 125.5 Gb of RAM) \[[8](file:///C:\l)\]. MCnebula
(MCnebula2) and other R packages were executed in Pop!\_OS (Ubuntu)
22.04 LTS 64-bits PC (Intel Core i7-1065G7, 1.3 GHz $\times$ 8, 16 Gb of
RAM).

Discussion materials

Classifying compounds based on their dominant structure is
straightforward. For example, we classify Taxifolin as a flavone, not a
phenol, even though its local structure contains a phenol substructure.
We prefer to classify compounds based on their dominant structure
because it is more concise and provides more information. However,
during the MS/MS spectral analysis, we sometimes can only classify
compounds based on their substructure.

It is essential to understand the hierarchy of chemical classification
to identify and organize compounds effectively. Flavones belong to a
superior classification of flavonoids, which in turn is part of the
higher-level classification of phenylpropanoids and polyketides. These
classifications are part of the broader classification of organic
compounds.

For example, the class of 'Organic compounds,' which covers almost all
compounds that can be detected in metabolomics data, is too broad to be
of any help to biological research. The parameter settings are not
absolute, and the thresholds can be adjusted according to the needs of
the study.
